# Impact on Information Resources

The CAP LTER added eighteen new datasets to its publicly available data holdings during the reporting year, bringing the total number of project datasets archived with the Environmental Data Initiative (EDI) to 218. New datasets of note feature time-series (2010-2017) of Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and Soil-Adjusted Vegetation Index (SAVI) data for the entire central Arizona region. These data were constructed by a CAP LTER graduate student, Dr. Michelle Stuhlmacher, with funding she received from the project. The data are novel in that Dr. Stuhlmacher sought input from the entire CAP LTER community regarding the development of the data with the goal of constructing data resources that would be of the greatest utility to CAP LTER investigators generally. In addition to new data contributions, the CAP LTER updated six existing datasets with new information and/or richer metadata. All CAP LTER dataset metadata are encoded in the XML-based Ecological Metadata Language (EML), with data and metadata available through the CAP LTER data catalog on the project website, the EDI data portal, and DataONE.

The CAP LTER Information Manager strives always to improve the presentation, utility, and management of CAP LTER information resources. Notable improvements for this reporting year include:

* The current (S. Earl) and former (P. Tarrant) CAP LTER Information Managers taught a course on research data management at Arizona State University in the spring of 2019. This course provided graduate students, including students actively involved with the CAP LTER, with a greater awareness of the importance of data curation, and the skills and tools needed to more effectively manage their research data.
* CAP LTER is integrating new features available in Ecological Metadata Language version 2.2.0 to provide richer metadata for its datasets.
* CAP LTER deployed new data-entry applications for several long-term monitoring programs to improve the efficacy of data entry, storage, and retrieval.
 
The CAP LTER is committed to making a strong contribution to informatics within the LTER Network and the ecological sciences generally. The CAP LTER Information Manager (S. Earl) participates in all network information meetings and activities, serves as co-chair of the LTER Information Management Executive Committee (IM Exec), contributes to community-wide efforts (e.g., is a contributing author of Ecological Metadata Language version 2.2.0), participates in and presents at numerous scientific conferences, and contributes to scientific- and informatics-focused publications. In addition, though past its official end date, S. Earl remains actively involved in the continued workings of a LTER Synthesis Working Group addressing soil organic matter dynamics.
